# Torbjรถrn Gyllebring: Sustainable Pace: lessons learned from running 100 miles

Torbjorn Gyllebring:  It hurts up to a point and then it doesn’t get any worse. Those are the words of Ann Parson after finishing an extremely ruling race. And these are also words that I sort of carry with me through many of the things that I find valuable and meaningful in my life. Running is one of them, standing on this stage, it hurts to some point but then it doesn’t get any worse.

So this is a talk about sustainable pace, it’s my lesson learnt from running 100 miles and this is a talk that haunts me. It’s one of the first sessions I ever did. It’s the one that has then sort of been haunting me because everyone that saw it the first time said ’’That talk was really good.’’ And I was like ‘’Thank you very much but I’ve been doing some other stuff after that.’’ One thing to remember, one thing that I concluded, for its rehash is that running 100 miles, sorry, that’s definitely not a sensible thing to do. 

That’s the first lesson. This is my lesson from jogging 100 miles! I’m not an elite athlete. I’m just a regular guy and this is approximately how this sport works. 90% of this game is mental, the rest is, the other half is physically. And just to get a feel of the room. Could everyone of you stand up if you’ve ever run, this should be approximately everyone. There’s a few people still sitting. Have you never ever run? Stand up! Ok. So keep standing if your longest run is 1 km or more. Ok. So, if you’ve run further then 5 km keep on standing. 10 km? Half a marathon, 21 km, that's insane. Ok. So who’s reached the peak of human potential, the marathon, 42 km? Your legs will fall off. More than 50 km? More than 50 miles, that’s 80 km. I have a few people still standing in the back. I wonder what they did.

So, if you close your eyes and you imagine that tomorrow is race day and then you answer a few questions for me, in your eye ‘’What do you pack? What stuff do you bring with you? How did you prepare? What have you been doing up to this point? Once at the starting line, what’s your strategy?’’ This talk isn’t a metaphor. This is a talk about running. Some people manage to make connections to projects out of it. Those are completely random and.. This is a running talk. Metaphors are brilliant. They let us discuss the things that we don’t understand in terms of something we understand even less of. Keep that in mind. 

So, I’m Tobbe and that's me trying to run. This talk will contain two unicorns. That’s one of them. It will contain two mentions of SAFe.

Audience: Boooooo!

Tobbe:  This is the first one. Some people already know what to do. If you want to e-mail me or reach out you’ll find me on twitter as drunkcod.com or you can just send an e-mail to shout@drunkcod.com and it will end up in my inbox and I will eventually answer it. 

So this is actually about extreme jogging. It all started out with me sort of thinking, well it correlated with me actually getting a promotion in a leadership role and that correlated with me starting to jog, to run. The thing is that I run when I was frustrated and that actually ended up being quite a lot. So I ran a lot.I got this idea that probably there’s something about running. I could probably use two principles since I am an extreme programmer. First edition: protocol. I should be able to use that to figure out how to run. It should be easy enough. And there’s a few different ways to make running hard and I am not deeply goof at either one of them. 

One of them is going fast. Trying to go fast is, it hurts, it hurts a lot and some people are extremely, extremely good at it. If you want someone, if you want an example of someone who’s really good at going fast take Usain Bolt. Or we can go far, we can go further and do something bigger and more grand than anyone has ever done before. At that end of the spectrum you’ll find people like Johnny Scorus that has the world record and the shortest time for running 1000 miles or running across America or doing a lot of insane things. So you can try to do things quickly or we can try to them over extended periods of time. Both of those bring with them their own challenges. I heard of someone wanting data. Being data driven is nice and this is actually data collected from a few of my projects over the span of a few years. And                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 what we can see here is that the velocity in my running projects sort of tends to go down the bigger the project is. Somewhere we see that we seem to hit fatigue. Something is slowing us down. The dynamics change. 

So, running 5K. The 5k’s are a brilliant starting race but this is already long distance running. 5k is far. But what do you actually need to run 5k’s? Well, you need to get up from your sofa, at first and then buy a pair of running shoes. And that’s approximately it. And you can probably do it in clogs, too, if you want to. There’s a lot to be said about shoes. These are a few of my favorites, but essentially any pair will do.  You go out and you’re running, that’s all you need to do. You go out and you’re running. You need to train for it but you don’t actually need a lot of stuff. The dynamics are very easy. You show up, you lace up your shoes, you go running. It’s an easy project. 

So, now what happens when you sort of say “Well, that was easy. Let’s go for 10k run.” Well, you need to train a bit, of course. You need to add some distance. On top of your shoes, all of the sudden, you are not only running, you’re sort of eating. You’re eating funky stuff like this is fructose. You might start drinking water. Drinking water is fine at 5k if it is too hot but most of the time you don’t need it. You start getting all this extra logistics just for the particular reason that you just went a little bit further. 

And then it starts getting weird, the half-marathon. The half-marathon, 21 Kilometers. This is sort of, this is where insanity starts. This is where people are going “Oh, you should probably be careful about that. Will your knees actually carry through?” And as a good friend of mine said that actually got me stuck on running to begin with, he’s like “Well, Tobbe, you need to understand that half-marathon is a completely different sport from the 10k.” And I’m like “What?” I’ll just be doing the same thing twice as much as I did the prior time. It can’t be that bad, can it? Anyone ever heard that? Anyone ever thought it? I fought with the 5k’s. That was easy. It was a hell of a running.  And then 10k’s, double. Sip some water, it’s ok. 

All of the sudden sports drinks start entering the picture. You go out for decently long runs and you sort of, you need all this crazy equipment. What’s this? Socks? Socks all of the sudden start to matter a lot. I didn’t think about my socks when I stood at the start of a 10k run. I’m like “Yes, I’ve got my shoes! I’m going that direction.” Socks have actually become more important. More gear is required.  We need to take more care. Now all of these sort of, it takes some extra preparation.  And then, of course, the challenge of a lifetime, the marathon. The ultimate thing to do. It’s this and then you die. Because that’s how we actually came up with the bloody idea and of course marathoning is from the start a male sport. Because we are the only ones that were dumb enough to actually run ourselves to death.  Anyhow, marathons. That’s two halves.” That’s a different sport”, my friend said.  Oh, yes, I can see the reasoning. 

So when you come up to the marathon all of the sudden you need to add, what’s this, energy gels. Why would I need that? Well, you do or you might not. The thing is that there would be some arguments regarding this some of the stuff that I said. Well, if I was only going for a low carb diet I wouldn’t need those bloody gels. It might be true, it might not. I found them very helpful but I’m caring extra stuff again. It’s one more thing to think about, again. And the texture of the race is starting to change. Anyone ever hit the wall? So, this doesn’t actually make the experience sort of.. This is more like a hit.  Boom! It’s horrible. It’s called bunking or hitting the wall. Essentially you’re cruising alone fine in the middle of your marathon and all of the sudden the wheels just fall off. And that happens for a very particular reason. It happens due to you being a system, a system in fine balance but with finite resources and constraints that you need to adapt to. So within your body you store about 200 calories worth, 200 calories worth of glycogen, blood sugar, most of it in your liver.  That’s enough to sustain you through the half marathon and it’s approximately enough to sustain you for 90 minutes of sustained, hard effort. And that’s approximately the 30k mark in a marathon. And that is when this happens. So, essentially, once you’ve reached that point you are out of blood sugar and everything becomes hard because you’re burning fat instead. And that’s what the gels are there to help you with, just to top off that limited energy supply. 

It hurts. It hurts bad, but if you want to see a battle field go and check a marathon at the 30k mark. And I was dumb enough to run a marathon and due to a bet ended up running one more.  And after running two marathons I was thinking “Wow, I have got this running business down. It’s good.”  And an old friend and classmate said, he’d always been running and said “What’s your next challenge? How will you top the marathon?” “I don’t know. I don’t have a clue.“And he said “Well, there’s this thing called ultra racing or ultra running.” The ultra starts where the marathon ends. So any distance beyond the marathon is, technically speaking, an ultra. And commonly ultra is  to start with is like 50k. And what he did, he found an interesting race, an interesting challenge and I was actually called the Tobbe extreme challenge. TEC100. So it’s a 100 mile run. That’s close to 3..That’s close to 4 marathons together. And he sort of got me to sign up. And I was like “We’ll try running for a bit.” We didn’t have a clue on how to actually do this, but we tried.

And this is essentially the first thing you find if you’re trying to figure out what the hell is this.  Any idiot can run a marathon. It takes a special kind of idiot to run an ultra marathon. And I’m a very special kind of idiot or I’m a bit like a bumblebee but I didn’t actually know that I couldn’t do it. So I just went out and did. One of the key points that..If you are trained in an ultra you’ll sort of figure a few things out. For example almost all of your trainings run, training runs are very much at, at a much higher pace than your regular training. You’re racing slower than your training. That’s complete opposite of everything else. 

So, 50 miles. 50 miles is an interesting distance, close to 2 marathons. So if the wheel falls off at 30k’s what the hell did you do for the remainder 50? That’s a good question, isn’t it? So, what you do is start eating and you slow down because you need to give yourself time to prepare and to actually, to sustain yourself. You can’t get too far into debt. So if the wheels fall off, hitting the wall is you running into technical debt within your body. So, running 50k’s you start drinking stuff like this. This isn’t the best sports drink ever. It tastes horrible but you get used to it and then it’s all Stockholm syndrome from there. The thing is that it contains both fat and proteins and complex carbohydrates. It’s, it’s actually, it’s almost like Soylent. It’s brilliant. And you’re starting eating meatballs on the run. Training for an ultra marathon entails training to eat while running. That’s a really, really strange experience. 

The hundred mile. The hundred mile race. So I saw a few interesting things in that small group that had set out to tackle this race and one of them was that you need to be committed. If you’re tackling something like this, if you’re tackling even the half marathon, even the 10k, there’s a really good predictor if you’re going to make it or not. And it’s simply this “If you think you are not going to finish, you won’t finish.” If your resolution isn’t complete, if you haven’t set your mind to it, you won’t finish. When you invite doubt into your mind, that’s when you lose the ultra. And all of the sudden you also need to carry a lot of more stuff. Running an ultra marathon, running 100 miles, the first time I did, I was on my feet running for 21 hours, 40 minutes straight. Think about that. I needed to keep on moving for almost a day and I also needed to carry a headlamp because, of course, you’ll be running through the night. You don’t stop. You need an emergency blanket. You need a ton of stuff like that. 

The pleasant part about ultras, having run them one more time, is that, there were two more times, this particular race, is that you can do stuff like set a PR with 3 hours. SO this year I ran the same race in 16 hours, 25 minutes. That’s approximately an hour per 10k 16 times in a row. The thing is that I have been running road races, and the particular 100 miles that I ran was quite flat. So there’s, other ways you can change this style of running. You can go “Uh, hill races!” I realized I’m terribly crap at that. I can run 100 miles but show me a hill and I’ll die. This is a good advice for the day “You can never run a hill too hard, you’ll collapse way before you hurt it.” 

We can go running on trails instead. You can use nature, you can go out and discover. And that also adds flavors. It requires technique, but it is a completely different experience from running those 100 miles on asphalt or easy trails. Just go out in the forest and run and be connected to nature. 

So, that’s my story, that sort of..This is 100 miles, this is sort of how the races relate. This is how the dynamics change. These are ways to make it hard. But what did I learn except for the fact that you do not run 100 miles, you jog it?

The power of habit. The thing is that if you want to complete that race, no matter what the distance is, no matter how big your project is, you want to find leading indicators, you want to find the stuff that helps you achieve what you want to achieve. I need you to focus on do’s. I need you to build good habits. I need you to learn the habits that build you up in order for you to actually be able to race. Habits is essentially… will you win it, will you lose it. It’s very much the power of consistency over heroics. So most people when they sign up to a race, especially if they sign up to the half marathon or marathon, what they do is that they postpone training for a bit and postpone it a bit more and then it’s race week. And then what do you do? You go out for this one monster run to prepare yourself. Anyone ever done that? Ok. I have done that a few times. It doesn’t actually work. 

The heroics, heroics will only set you back, will brake you down. You need to be consistent, you need to always be running. You don’t need a whole lot of training. I train as much as about most people claim to train. I spend 45 hours a week exercising. That’s not a whole lot. But I do it every week.  Sticking with it, practicing. You need to always be practicing if you want to be, if you want to perform. That’s the thing. You need to get into that habit. You need to get into a mind set of always, always training, always practicing. Train on training. So, the best mindset is essentially adopting one “I’ll be training on training.” Can I get 3 or 4 runs in this week? Don’t actually..It doesn’t matter if they’re long or short, if they’re hard or easy. You just want to build that habit of getting those runs in.

	And what would cause anyone to not train? Why would anyone not want to exercise? So, this is essentially true. I’ve got a good friend that said “Well, you know, training, that’s something that you do between eating and injury.” He was injured all the time and he didn’t actually progress. If you accumulate so much damage to your body or anything else that breaks down, you won’t get to the starting line. And if you don’t get to the start, you probably won’t get to the finish. Training ain’t racing. A lot of people sort of conflict these two concepts. When you train, you train. When you race, you race. Delivery and practice are different things. During training you can do a lot of stuff that you wouldn’t be doing during the race. You want to test your racing capabilities. You want to be close to performance as much as you can. But you also want to pay extra attention and be kind to yourself. In the race? That’s a different story. 

Essentially, anything you need to do to deliver a sizable project like running 100 miles is you need to train, we talked about that, you need to eat, eat well and you need to sleep. Most people forget one of those. They forget to sleep. If you’re not sleeping, you’re not recovering. If you’re not recovering, you’re not improving. If you don’t give yourself space to internalize and to grow, to recuperate, you won’t be delivering, you won’t be performing. And all the effort you put in to your training will be wasted. It doesn’t matter how hard you train, unless you sleep. And don’t forget, you need to eat, train, sleep. Repeat. Habit, consistency, these are the things that will build you up to reach your goals. 

So, you learn by racing, but races aren’t for learning. When you’re out there, hunting your dreams, the last thing you want to do is start experimenting. You come up to an aid station and you say “Uh, new, shiny sports drink!” Don’t take it. If you see anything at that aid station that’s new and shiny, a new goody, don’t take it. Go with what you know. I think there’s a lesson in that. You’ll learn a lot, you’ll learn a lot about what works, what doesn’t work but do not experiment when you are trying to perform at your best.  

Behaviors give results. That’s the thing. You focus on the behaviors that are the requirement to get the new results you want. You focus on leading indicators. You focus on getting those run is, runs in. You focus on the paces. You focus on how your body is adjusting to training load. You get feedback so you get leading indicators in the moment. Get a pulse watch, get anything that gives you by feedback, so you can air on every single moment while you’re training. Get feedback on how you’re doing. The results, the outcomes are simply the result of consistently training. So focus on behaviors. Always, always, always focus on the behaviors. The results will come, they’re still static but if you focus on the results, you’ll start to go for heroics. And if you go for heroics, you’ll probably, as someone said, you’ll lose faith in your running. If you  do like, was it Monika? I’m getting back to running, I’m going to run 10k. So I haven’t run in half a year and you feel like shit. And you won’t. You’ll overextend yourself. Focus on the behaviors.

You should never fear moving slowly. Relentless forward progress. That’s how you improve. It’s not about getting everything done, it’s not about improving every single aspect of your running life. It’s about taking one step at a time. It’s about one small improvement here, one small improvement there. Constant Kaizen based on feedback, consistency, habit.

And you need to know why you are racing. You need to know why you are doing this. You need to know your goal. Is it simply to finish? Is it simply to reach the finish line? Or is it to give it your all? Because this will, is in your strategy and your strategy needs to be consistent from the first step with your goal. If you just want to finish, take it slow. If you want to give it your all, well, then you will also burn out. Then you will at times fail. So which one is it? Both are valuable, but you need to know on the starting line why you are there. To race well is to race evenly. So the best results in a distance, or in a race will be had if you get close to neutral split. That is if you ran the first half at approximately the same pace as you ran the second half. That’s sustainable pace for you. You need to figure out what the pace, what pace exactly to start at and then just to keep at it. You often say that it’s not the fastest runner that wins, it’s the one that slows down the least. Keeping at it. And this goes for, but in order to that you of course need to know what race you’re running. And often we think that running uphill is a battle, is a struggle. We can see the effort it takes. But running downhill requires technique. It’s where you can gain massively on everyone else.  So learn proper technique for running downhill and figure out what downhills are. 

Cadence. Cadence is one of the most important aspects. And this is a magic number, 180. That’s approximately the number of steps you want to take every single minute. You want to drum it into your body so you naturally run at that cadence. SAFe.

Audience: Booooooo!

Tobbe: See, SAFe like programs or SAFe training programs. There’s tons of programs out there, there’s tons of framework, frameworks, that will sort of, how to structure your training. And they’re all good and people earn a lot of money creating them and they’re useful but they should be used as inspirations. You should take the parts that you like and discover the rest of them. It needs to be close to you. You need to listen to your body. You need to watch your results.  You need to build it for you. Use them as inspiration but don’t rely on them. 

So this is my question to you : What is your next race? Do you know how far it is? Do you know what your goal is because if you don’t it’s not very likely that you’ll be able to pace yourself. It’s not likely that you’ll be able to prepare, to figure out what gear you actually need. It’s not likely that you’ll finish or that you’ll race well. So please, before going out for that next run, figure out what your purpose is.  And if you want to read a very honest story about one man’s struggle, read this book “Seeking Ultra”. It’s written by one of the most humble and honest guys I know. It’s written by Paul and it’s essentially, he’s going from a couch potato to an ultra marathon in 6 months. It will give you tons of practical tips along the way. Read it. It’s brilliant. And go run. 

One more thing. I promised you a unicorn. So always remember that “Last is just the slowest winner.”  Thank you very much.   



