# Martin Burns: Dive into A3 Thinking

Man: I know you guys were expecting Martin and in fact we’ve decided to cancel Martin’s talk because we’ve got far more important things to talk, which is, why we are so far behind our competition. So you don’t know who I am, and I’m your new boss and we’re canceling Martin’s talk and unless we can come up with a way of getting past our competitors, who are like 100 times better than we are, we are canceling the rest of the conference as well, and if we have to, and we can’t come up with any ideas in these two days we are canceling Christmas as well, thank you for your time.
Martin Burns: So, no point canceling my talk, that’s a bit of a feeling of what is like when things are going incredibly badly. Liz set this up for me beautifully. Imagine your boss came on stage and absolutely seriously said that to you. “Our competition is 100 times better, if we don’t change we die. A hundred times better. And you are the only people who can work out how we can fix this.” Now, me I’ll say ‘’ 100 times better, boss you’re having a laugh.’’ This is real, this is real for Toyota in the 40’s. So before World War II, in the 30’s, everybody accepted that the relative productivity between Japan and the USA was a factor of 9 or 10 to 1, with Germany in between, generally accepted. And you can guess from the date that over the next 7 or 8 years in particularly the end Japanese productivity take a bit of a down turn. Again as Liz set up beautifully, you nuke people twice, you destroy all their industry and life is not good.
So, by the end of World War II by ’46, ’47, the difference between America and Japanese productivity was about in the order of 100 to 1, and the chairman of Toyota said to his people ‘’We have to catch up with the Americans’’. Serious challenge. 100 to 1, and you are the only people who can work out how. Fortunately because they are in that state of chaos, they’ll open to learning the new ways of doing it. So did it work for them? Well, let’s have a look. The American government did a survey in car manufacturing in productivity between best in cars American, Ford, best in cars Japanese, Toyota. Number of hours it took to build a vehicle, Toyota 47 hours, Ford 113 Hours, 2,5 times difference roughly. And in cost terms even more significant, even more star contrast. 5 to 1 difference. And that’s not because Japanese labor is or was so cheap. Quite the reverse. But if you’re working for Toyota you are building cars. There are not a lot of Toyota jobs that involve sitting in an office. So, this was the point where the American government realized our car industry is dead. The body is twitching a little, but it’s effectively dead. And that has happened getting to that state to being 10 to 1 behind. 
What I’m going to talk to you about just now is how they did that. Now, who’s read some stuff about Lean? Yeah, that’s quite a lot. So, we know a little about Kanban and tool systems and a whole range of Japanese terminology. All of that is not why Toyota made that difference. Described by the man himself, ok, that didn’t click, Taiichi Ohno who came up with most of this said ‘’All the stuff you know as Lean, it’s not important. The most important thing is all of it that just countermeasures the business problems that Toyota has had. And if we find better things all of those things, we’ll throw away. Happily. It’s just a matter of finding a way of addressing the problem we have. And that’s what this way of working is all about.: So, the thing that made Toyota jump that gap is they have a problem solving culture. No, sorry they have an obsessive problem solving culture. 
There’s a great story about one of the first American graduates into Toyota. On his first day, ok you come in, uhhh, this is me, this is Toyota, scary. So, they, you come in through the security and they give you a badge or guidance, and that kind of nice stuff. They show you to your desk and there waiting on your desk is a problem to be solved and a coach patiently waiting for you to turn up to help you through that. Now, the problem for this person it was something small like rearranging the stationery cupboard. But it was a real problem. 
So Pawel was talking earlier about organizational culture. What does that behavior tell you about the organizational culture of Toyota? The one thing they want absolutely everybody to be obsessive about is finding and fixing problems. So, straw poll. Ok using the same method Pawl did earlier. Everybody stand up. Ok. This is about the number of improvements you have seen around you in the place you work in the last year. If you have seen more than 10 genuine improvements happen in the last year, sit down. Ok? If you’ve seen between 5 and 9 improvements, sit down. Between 1 and 4? The other are, ok. 
I used to work for a large global technology company and I did this with, ok. This is in front of everybody and there is a certain pressure to admit there were no improvements. We did this with writing surveys. Ok. Across a number of events over the course of a year.1000 responses. And this is what we found. Nearly half who worked for this global technology company saw no improvements whatsoever around them in the previous year. That’s not an obsessive problem solving culture. So, it’s getting to a point where every day you’re coming in thinking what are the problems and how do we make them better. And there are a number of things that stop you from doing this. Ok? I’m not going to ask you to raise hands but nod along as you see some of these. So you come up with a great idea and you go ‘’ Boss, boss, I want to change the way we work.’’ And the manager says ‘’No. that’s not how we work. We do it like this. We have a process, we follow the process.’’ Ok. We’ve made improvement, that’s great, but we can’t sustain it. Oh, yeah, problem solving. We need a coach to help us with that, we need a guru, we need somebody from outside. We don’t know how to make things better. Yeah, we’re already busy. We’d love to make things better, but we are under pressure to deliver. We want to do big change, don’t worry about the little stuff. Big change, low hanging fruits that we can claim and ask an investment for. We need to have a business plan for every change. There’s only some things that we can do. There’s a very limited range of what we can change. A lot of problem solving, and I’ve heard this from time to time, yeah, it’s a good theory. It’s all theory. It doesn’t address the reality of where we are.  The vast majority of management issues across by solving the wrong problem. But solving it really well.And finally you the same problem appearing in lots of different cases. So fix it over here and it appears over there. So you want something that fixes or addresses a lot of these. So you want something that takes the people that would block change and brings them with you. And makes it easy for people to say ‘’oh, that’s a great idea. Or alternatively, that’s a dumb idea’’ but to be able to really understand, understand what you are talking about. And it takes the knowledge of the people who were doing the work. That’s the definition of a knowledge worker, right? Somebody who knows more about what they do than their boss does. So,you something that communicate the problem really well.You want to solve the right problem? You want to make sure those solutions stick. And you want to actually have a thinking process as opposed to ‘’Oh, that seems like good idea, but I haven’t thought it through.’’ So you want to solve the problem really well and to make you really part of culture you want to make sure that everybody does this. From the most junior person right up to the top boss take part in this process. You don’t want gurus, you want people who do the work. So, you want to develop problem solvers that can then be better at solving problems. 
So, A3 method does all of this when you do it well and uses that same cycle, Pawel, you were talking about this. He called it PDCA, I use PDSA. It’s the same thing. It says ‘’first let’s understand the problem really, really well. We all like to be solutions people. If we were a firing squad most of the time we would go ‘’Ready, fire, aim.’’ We run from the problem space to the solution space far too quickly in most cases. So, it says ‘’Let’s understand the problem. Let’s understand why this is important. Why do we care about this thing rather than that thing?’’ it says ‘’We are here and we want be there. Or the other way around depending on what you want to measure. And what’s stopping us from getting there? And understanding all of these before you go near any solution and then you set a small experiment. Then says ‘’Ok. Let’s try some stuff. Based on our analysis, this seems like a reasonable thing to do. But there’s uncertainty so it might work, it might not. We don’t know until we try. Let’s find out. Did it work? If so, we do that. That’s what we do now. Our experiment showed us a better way of working, so, we replace what we do with what we’ve tried. If not, it’s not a failure. If not, we say  let’s understand why and that’s when the learning takes place. Everything you predict happen you don’t learn anything. 
Now, a couple of deadly warnings first. Firstly this is not a tool, this is not a template, yes is a template but is not about the tool, not about the template, it’s about a way of thinking. We’re not fixing problem we’re fixing thinking, I found that imagine on Twitter, and I thought it expressed it really well. Secondly, ok there is a template, on the open spaces, and I encourage you to join the open spaces I’ll be writing about it, we will give you the template. Use a pencil, you will be doing these iteratively, you will be making mistakes, you will be changing what you’ve done and work through it progressively, toughly as suppose to say ‘’ Yeah, I’m going to fill all the template’’ that already works. 
And thirdly do not, do not, do not do this in a computer. Computers is where A3 goes to die. Far better write it, stick it on the wall, carry it around with you, take it to talk to people saying ‘’ This is what I think. What do you think? Have I got the right end of this? Have I misunderstood the reality completely?’’ If you do it on power point this things don’t happen. Ok. 
So, back to where we were. So, if you have this simple thing, yeah, understand the problem and then run some experiments to try some solutions out, you transfer it to one piece of paper, colored looks like this, and we’re going to step through this very briefly much more in the open space. But one piece of paper, I like warm pieces of paper, I don’t like thick reports, this I can talk somebody through in 5 minutes. A 30-page power point tech explaining problems, I can’t do that. This means I have to be clear about the way I write things. And if I’m not clear, people will spot it. They will say ‘’Hang on, that logic doesn’t make sense.’’ Whereas if it’s in a deep power point deck, they have to think ’’Well, you’ve said something 5 pages ago and I’m not sure I remember it right.’’ Warm piece of paper.
Ok. So, who does it, this is important. This is not a one person sport, this is a team game. It’s a 2-person game. Always 2 there are. Yeah, I couldn’t not put that up. This is absolutely a coach method because you cannot spot your own biases. You can’t work out where your problems are because you’re too close to it. Plus, of course, there are some stuff you don’t understand as well as other people. So, it is deliberately about a problem solver and coach. And who is the best person to be a coach? Yeah, professional coaches, yeah, sorry not you, guys. Include me in that. It’s the person who understands your context best. The person who should be owning the system in which you work. You can call those persons a manager. So, this is the opinion of Jim Womack who has written a whole load of fantastic columns. You are always there. Very much about this kind of scenario. This is what managers should be doing. They should be saying ‘’Right. I understand the context well enough to understand the problems. I don’t understand it well enough to provide the solutions.’’ So, we need the problem solver to be the person whose work has impacted. Managers aren’t close enough to understand the facts. But the person who’s doing the problem solving, is too close to it. So, you have to have a relationship between the two that work together to do this. 
What kind of problems? This is exactly what Liz was talking about. This is designed for continuous small problems. Ok? Becauseif you have a vision of you’re here now, we’d like to be there.  You think ‘’Well, we’re going that way.’’ Perfection looks like that, you can’t get there on one go because of the J-curve of change, because the bigger the jump, the longer it takes to get back up to where you want to start with. The worse it gets, the deeper the bottom is and usually somewhere around here the organization gets bored and you get fired. Not a good thing. So he says ‘’Ok, that’s too big a jump and there’s too much fuzziness in between that means we can’t see how up that jump is. So why don’t we just choose something that’s a bit better.” Yeah, you’re walking in a fog. You can see a meter in front of you. You can’t see a hundred meters. Let’s pick the meter in front.  Do a small change. Where do we want to be next, small change. 
So, to give you some examples of this and if I have my speaker notes I could be better able to see them, I could be able to do this because I don’t have them in my memory. But this is one reason why Britain was a significant force in the industrial revolution because British culture is about blocks and sheds who tinkle with things. Not the huge innovation, but the little idea. Just make it a bit better. So there was a whole set of innovations in producing machines that made threads. Yeap, from a single spinning wheel. Now this was the first innovation, this was the spinning jenny. 8 threads at once.Fantastic.8 times productivity improvement. You know, if you went to your bosses ‘’You know, I cans get you 9 times productivity improvement.’’ They jump at it. Yes? Some of us can even retire on that amounts of innovation and improvement. Fine, but it wasn’t good enough. People kept on thinking, you know, I’ve got this problem. So some of the things that start to be done, this, the wheel at the top when it gets to the end it hits a hard stop which if you have a fine thread, breaks. So, if you have a way of slowing down the acceleration and deceleration of the wheel then you can make finer threads which are more valuable. The people started saying, well that’s still manually operated. What if I manage to get some water power in that? It might be better so you start seeing this kind of thing happening. And over time, innovation sits on top of innovation. Till a hundred after the first one you get this: one person can run a thousand threads at once. Small innovation on small innovation on small innovation.
So that’s what we’re trying to do. Ok. We started with ‘’why did you pick this problem and not that problem, and until you’ve got this right, there’s no point in getting any further whatsoever. Why did you pick this problem?’’ and making sure that all your stake holders are with you on that and that’s the idea. It’s a method of discussing to be able to take this round everybody and say ‘’I think this matters.’’ What do you think?’’and taking their views into account and iterating over it again and again until you have something enough of the organization are happy with. You may not be able to satisfy everybody. You kind of have a duty to go back and explain why, but it’s building that community of change from the very start that everybody is saying “Yeah, we have something important that we have to do something about.” So, I’m not going to go through the example because I haven’t got time. But I’m happy to do that in the open space. 
So again, if we define the problem as a gap between where we are now and where we want to be. And again you take this round all your stake holders, all the people who do the actual work to be able to say. I think this is where we are.’’ Using real data I think it was Deming that said ‘’In god we trust’’ everybody else brings data and using that to help define we are here, we want to be there. Then you do some analysis. So, this is how we are doing analysis, it’s called the 5 why method. You keep asking why 5 times usually gets you that until you get usually a process that isn’t working very well. Ah, so if we fixed that, you know you’ve got it right because you can step backwards over there and replace why with therefore. Because we didn’t have a check list therefore we forgot to prepare a process order. Therefore we forgot because, therefore we prepared the process order too late, therefore we didn’t get all the signatures, therefore it was too late to get the food delivered therefore the food didn’t arrive in time. 
And there’s another example, these slides I will tweet with the conference hashtag before the end of the day. Ok? That. We can look at this example when we have more time. Then we think what we are going to do to address it. We come up with some ideas and if you can’t come up with half a dozen of ideas, you probably not thinking hard enough. But the beauty of this is that you don’t have to have an argument about my idea is best than your idea. We say ‘’we can try them both. That’s ok. Lets’ try your idea first.’’ And if it works, fantastic. That’s what we do. Ah, but then we’ll try my idea. See if it’s even better. But it means you don’t have to have a fight to see who’s the smartest guy in the room. Little quiet to say we are going to get there. Literally it’s 4 or 5 line plan. It doesn’t have to be, you know, Microsoft projects. 500-line gap chart stuff. Who’s going to do it, when are they going to do it? And that’s come on. 
How do we know if it will work? So you want to have some measurement systems in place that can express it in the same form as you express the problem. So, you know. Did it work? Didn’t it work? How well did it work? Then you say if it worked , how are we going to take this learning to the rest of the organization rather than having something that is just here? All the, what’s the phrase they used? I can’t remember. All the people that will not want to block change. This is where you , right from the start, you start how we’re going to get over that. So, does this method work? Absolutely it works and here is an example that I had. This was risks and issues that the team were tracking. We introduced a change about here and said ‘’ our number of new issues drops kind of like a stone after we introduced it. 
One example. Number one, this was around on boarding people, to a process, to a team it took weeks and weeks and weeks. This was very painful because we were paying for all that time. The team I worked with, this was an offshore team in India quite young guys. They worked out how to drop the time from coming to the door to being productive from 43 days to 23 days. And while they were doing it, they came up with some ideas that said ‘’We think we can get it down under 4 days after that.’’ 
This is a Japanese manufacturing company. They’ve simplified their A3 template to really, really simple stuff. Before, after but they have lightened that and it works so well for them. This is the same organization. They have 8 improvement ideas per employee per month. Think about what that amount of innovation can do to your organization. Hugely powerful. Ok.
How do we make it happen in an organization? Yes, I’m watching the time, Paul. Firstly you have to learn to be the problem solver, it’s really hard to learn this from a book. I learnt it from a book and I suck at it. Every person I’ve coached to do this are better problem solvers than I am. Every single one of them.Because they learnt it from me, not from a book.The hands on method. And once you know how to do then  you can coach other people which has happened to have the same dynamics. It’s really hard to learn from a book. All the people that I coached to coach are better coaches than I am. Then you get a nice virtual circle. And what you should end up with is chains of coaching pairs going up and down the organization. Kind of like that. Masters and apprentices, coaches and problem solvers and the problem solvers are coaches to other people up and down the organization. 
There are a whole bunch of resources, some reading, all sort of useful books. The last two are really interesting. There is a very nice deck of cards that give you. I Iost it. Ok it’s in the slides. It’s a nice deck of cards giving you a lot of coaching questions. There is an app as well. Where we’re going to go next? There is an open space this afternoon. If you haven’t done this before, you’ll be learning to do. Think of real problems to bring with you. Ok. I’ve got a stack of A3 templates that we can do this with. If you have done this before as a problem solver, you’ll be learning to coach. And you’ll be coaching other people in the open space. Nice virtual circle.
 And that is just about it. Thank you very much. 