# Monika Konieczny:  How to Wake Up and Feed the Mysterious Motivation Beast

Monika Konieczny: Hello everyone! It’s really nice to see you. It’s really nice to meet so many old friends and make new friends here and have so many vivid discussions about various topics. So, what I wanted to talk about with you, what kind of stories I wanted to tell you today, it was related to motivation. Usually the first thing if you think about motivation is this. It’s the carrot and the stick, right? We usually think about the motivation in this way and as much as I like carrots, I’m not kind of sure if I like the sticks, we can go in more deep discussions probably. But this is the first, well in many cases, at least in my case, that’s the first connotation. Then we think if it works or not. Yes! So this is the combined version, right? So you have a stick which is created from the carrot so that’s the most efficient way of having the motivation at parts. If any of you knows where I can find this guy, I would be more than happy to have one. 

What other kind of other connotation we have when we think about motivation? To be honest with you this time when I was thinking about the presentation, when I was thinking about this talk, I started thinking about only me, about my perspective, about my connotations. So, this is one of them. So, when I think about motivation of course Mr. Maslow is coming to my mind and his beloved pyramid, well, a little bit updated to the current state of my mind and probably there might be also other people sharing my view here in this place. When I started having problems with motivation I thought maybe there were some research, maybe there were some brilliant scientists who did some research, who were trying to discover what it is all about. How can I change it, how can I empower my motivation, how can I motivate myself? And what is probably more important, how can I motivate other people? So, I looked into the books and I started screaming very, very scared because it was, oh, my God, there were so many people, so many bright people doing so many research, doing so many experiments, having so many ideas how the motivation mechanisms work, how they can be applied to the daily life. 

Probably you know most of the names which are on the slide like Herzberg’s theory about the hygienic parts of the motivation and internal parts. So that the hygienic would be what the salary, the office, how is it organized and everything over there. And then when everything is ok with the hygienic parts of the motivation, then the internal motivation can grow. Then there was of course, there is the theory, theory x and theory y related to motivation. Theory x is that people are just bad, they don’t like working, they prefer to be lazy and they prefer to just do nothing. There is also the theory y that people are great, they like working, they are self motivated. They like to be in, they like to participate in the management process, they like to be creative. So, a lot of conferring ideas, right? There is Pink with his drive theory. There is Adams about the balance theory that we as people we compare us to each other if the amount of effort we put. Do we get as much as other people? Do we get enough for ourselves? So we are doing constant, a verification of what we do. Mayo was experimenting when he was trying to distinguish if the light and external things are, how they are applying to the work. And of course Taylor who was looking at the workers. He was thinking how he can motivate the workers to work, to work harder, to work better, to be more efficient. So, when I started looking at all those research, the  results, great papers, great books, I was “Oh, my God, how can I apply it to myself? How can I do it? It’s all conferring. I am not sure if it will work.“ 

So and I just thought “Maybe I will try to experiment on myself and that’s going to be interesting.” So I did. When I started the experiment, at some point I felt that I’m trying to self manipulate. Pretty bad feelings because in many cases motivation is somehow connected, well connected in our minds when we thing about, at least in my mind, when I think about motivation and motivating other people. There is this grain of manipulation. I’m not always sure what is the correlation between motivation and manipulation, where is the barrier and how not to cross it. 

So, after reading all those books I almost felt like reading this, so “7 easy steps to live your life the right way” and of course we all love those kinds of guides. Probably a lot of us read a lot of them and they helped us a lot and our life is so much better after reading and applying all the magic rules. No. At least it didn’t happen in my life. After reading the research, the books and everything it was all great. Now I have much more knowledge. Now I understand some mechanisms better and in most cases when I was reading each and every theory I was like “Oh, yes, that will apply to me. That’s how I work. That’s the way how my internal mechanisms work.“ I was almost like one of those medicine students who are reading about, well things that can happen to human beings and they discover they are so much sick whereas they are not. So I thought that maybe, maybe there’s somewhere inside of me there’s some little alien called motivation beast and maybe, maybe there’s some way to wake him up. Maybe there’s a way to somehow negotiate with the beast to act as I would like to, as I would like it to act. So I said ”Oh, great let’s wake it up. Let’s wake it up. It’s going to be great. Just let me think what could be the alarm clock.” On a daily basis alarm clock is not my favorite item near my bed. I really hate the clock, especially the alarm clock when it rings when I am not very ready to wake up. So, when I started using the sort of alarm clock to wake up my motivation beast by using all the great rules, great recipes which were found in the books. It was more or less like this. So, the beats really woke up but it was totally not under my control. So I didn’t feel very well. Then I felt like “Oh, God, if I do the same mistakes to other people while trying to motivate them I can also wake up their beats inside and they will not feel really great. So, what to do?

That’s a better version of the beast, to tame it a bit, to make it a bit more fluffy, to make it a bit more nice to the owner. But how to do it? The alarm clocks kill dreams. It’s so very true, right? Every single day the alarm clock is killing our dreams and it’s making them go away. That’s why I usually, I was trying to get into this habit that after waking up I’m trying to write down the ideas and the dreams it never works as great as I would like it to be. So, you need to be very cautious with this alarm clock. The first question which I started asking myself is why do I want to motivate myself? Why do I want to motivate other people? The first answers coming to my mind were of course all those great that I’ll be able to do better things, they will be able to change the world, they will be able to achieve more, to be happier, to be more satisfied. It is going to be all great. But it was just, you know, just words? They are all very great, they are very.. It’s just words. So then I started .. that could help me. Oh, I’m thinking that my voice is going up and down. Interesting. So, I started thinking what for? Something is wrong? Something is wrong, right? I don’t know. Something is wrong but I can still talk. Whatever is happening, that’s a weird thing. 

So, that’s the motivation beats which is trying to overcome and oh, God. So, yes, it is interesting right now.  The alien is really somewhere inside. So, I was thinking what for? Why do I want to motivate myself? What is the ultimate goal? And I think that that was the most important question. Not why but rather what for. It’s much more difficult to find the answer to it. So, when you want to start motivating, motivating yourself, motivating other people, what I did, the first step was after all those messy steps related to trying to apply all the theories and trying to check all the things which were not working, I was getting less and less satisfied and I was very frustrated, I just sat down and started asking questions to myself. It’s not an easy exercise. It’s quite hard to answer those kind of questions. But if you know why are you doing it and more important what for are you motivating others, are you motivating yourself, it’s getting a bit easier. 

What is your definition of success, right? Is there success that you want to achieve? Maybe it’s not all about the success.  Living in this culture of success, everybody wants to achieve success, everybody wants to be a successful person. Success means happiness, means balance, means all the other things. So, there are different doors which you take, there are different definitions of success, right? Like do nothing, do everything, do anything. You need to think about yourself. What is your answer? If you think about work, because work is a very important part of our life, right? We are usually very focused on the work. It is giving us a lot of satisfaction. It is also giving us a lot of pain because of various reasons. And you need to think what is work for you, assuming that the motivation part you want to use for your work.

 So, in many cases at work you may feel like this. At least I felt like this. So, I knew that I was going somewhere and a lot of people who are going together with me. So, we were all together in it but somehow we didn’t. Why are we going? What is the goal? Where are we marching? Why are we doing all of this? And it was very difficult, it was a very painful process. 

I would need two volunteers actually because I wanted to show you one thing. I promise that this time nobody will be painted or anything bad will happen, at least I hope, assuming the technology will not try to kill me once again. So, I will need those two volunteers. By volunteer I mean a person who will stand up. I know that you are good at standing up because you are training all the day long. Ok. We have one volunteer. So huge applause for the volunteer. It’s all for you. 

Man: ….

Monika: but you’re my favorite tiger. So, we will need one more volunteer I would like to join us over here. Who would like to join Iacob? So, let me find a volunteer because I’m sure that I will see one somewhere there. Usually they are hiding somewhere in the back. So, yes, you look like a volunteer. Hi. It’s nice to meet you.  I’m Monika. Come on. Let’s meet with Iacob. He’s your new friend, you’ll like all together. You’ll spend all night together probably discussing a lot of Agile things. I’m almost sure. Ok. They’ve just made friends. So, huge applause for the second volunteer.  So, I what you to feel more or less like the guys, like the guys over there. So, Iacob, it’s not just because you have glasses, because both of you have. So, we will do a short experiment, hopefully you will not see a lot at this point. 

Man: I can see a thing like that.

Monika: But you can’t also breathe and I’m not sure if that’s the part that I, I would prefer if you’d breathe. It’ s going to be easier for you. Ok. Oh, everyone sees everything. That’s cool. So, right now.  Yes, sure, I’ll try not to break them. Ok.

Just to make sure that you have some sort of tool, power to. Ok, you have very huge hands, but. It’s a compliment, of course. It is a compliment. So, you have, we are in a situation that Iacob is right now is a developer so he needs additional skills, additional power to make sure that he will be able to fight with all the obstacles. So, for the next  few minutes you are going to be, you’re going to be, you’re going to have opportunity to be Iacob’s, Tomak, you’re going to be a product owner, a person who has, who has a sort of a vision and who has a project to be done. So, here is the project that needs to be done. Now let’s. Is there anything I need to do to make other people see the project we are doing? Because you are probably very curious what is happening over here. So, the guys over there, the magicians, are doing their magical job. So, Iacob, is going to be now a bit more difficult, but you will manage, ok? 

Iacob: Ok.

Monika: Ok. You as, you Tomak as the manager. I’m not sure if I can take the other microphone so that you can give some short instructions to Iacob to make sure that he is able to, to make sure that he is able to deliver the project. So, what Iacob has, as you are not seeing it, yet, is something like this. It’s a very, very simple game, maybe you’re connected. It’s a wooden box with some holes, plus there’s the ending hole which is the ultimate goal and there’s a small silver bullet. So, what Iacob has to do is, having Tomak’s guidance, he needs to get the ball to the final hole. Let’s see if it’s going to happen like this. So, you as the manager, as the Scrum master who is helping with removing the obstacles, you need to help Iacob with making the project come true. 

Tomak: Ok.

Monika: And then the silence started. 

Tomak: So, that’s really tough task. I will, to make our language common, I will ask you to turn right or turn left, or go up or down.  Ok?

Iacob: Like this? Left.

Monika: So he’s trying to go left or right as you can see. 

Tomak: Turn to right to move the table right. This is excellent. To turn left means to go the other way. 

Monika: Look at what is happening. You can see on the screen up.  

Tomak: To go up means to go further. To go back means to go back.

Iacob: Exactly like in playing.

Monika: Yes. It’s exactly like in a play.

Tomak: Yes. This would be like flying planes. We will go up and turn a little bit left.

Monika: Exactly like an airplane. Look at their relationship. 

Iacob: So, up.

Tomak: Further left. Once again. Up and left. 

Monika: Ok, something is going wrong.

Tomak: Left. So, go right further and quickly left. Monika: No matter how Tomak is trying, Iacob is failing. In other words another failure in the project. 

Tomak: Further, slowly further. Left. Again. It’s really tough.

 Monika: I’m only waiting for the moment when Cuba will start punching someone but that’s why.

Tomak: Monika, I’m getting all, 

Monika: Yes.

Tomak: I have the feeling that I’m getting demotivated on doing that because it’s really tough for me. 

Monika:  Because Cuba is not able to do it? Oh, come on. You’re a great manager, you’ll be able to motivate your

Tomak: Cuba is great at doing this but it’s really tough for me to give him a guidance. 

Monika: Why? What is the biggest problem that you’re dealing with?

Tomak: That 

Monika: That he’s not listening to you?

Tomak: That he’s not seeing, he’s not seeing the goal of this and not only seeing the goal but only we don’t see why we do it. 

Monika: So, as the manger or the Scrum master you should help him avoid the main obstacles which I hope was this or maybe giving you glasses would be even better, most probably. So, let’s do it this way. Ok? Perfect. So, are you able to finish the project right now? Any chance? Too bad you cannot see. He’s extremely exciting. Iacob is really trying to put the ball into the right hole and it’s almost there, almost there. Well, it’s just a matter of seconds because he’s extremely patient, he’s doing great. Yes. He did it.

Tomak: Yes.

Monika: Applause for the guys. The project has been just finished. Ok. So, problem solved. Thank you so much. So, as you started saying, you didn’t feel really well with the project, right? Because Coba was really demotivated because he did not see the goal, you were demotivated because..Why, why were you demotivated?

Tomak: Because I didn’t see the reason, I didn’t see the way to do it properly with his eyes being shut down and I didn’t see a reason why we do it that way because it was really tough to complete the task. So I didn’t, I have not seen the way  forward to complete the task. 

Monika: Mhm! Ok.

Iacob: We had some general understanding about what does it mean sharply left or slightly right, but.. So, we know what is up, right, left, down, but what the hell does slightly mean? It’s not the same for him as it is for me.

Monika: Ok, thank you so much. Thank you for your feedback. Thank you for being the volunteers. Once again the applause for guys. Ok. So showing you this very, very short task and I’m really and I kindly appreciate your help, guys, because you were really great. So, in this kind of a short task, in this kind of a short game, yes, I know, I’m always into games and I cannot, you know , it’s hard for me not to see the world through the games. But, using this kind of game you can easily watch the motivation mechanism. So, whenever you are blinded, you don’t see the goal, it’s very hard to be motivated to finish the task.  It was extremely frustrating for Cuba because he really wanted to help Tomak with the project. He really wanted to accomplish this. But, unfortunately, because of his blindness, he wasn’t able to. He was listening carefully to the instructions. He was following all the instructions, but it was too hard. Whereas Toamk, as you could see, he was even touching Cuba. And by touching, I mean he was trying to touch the tablet to help him. He was desperately wanting to help Cuba, but in the end it was rather not possible. 

And that’s something that is also happening in our daily life. It’s something that is happening in the projects, right? It’s so, in many cases, the team, we feel blinded. We feel blinded because we don’t see the ultimate goal of the project. We don’t see why this business decision was made or not. We don’t feel as we are the partners, as someone is taking into consideration our voice and what we think. On the other side, the product owner, he understands a lot, he sees the whole spectrum. He has the full context but it’s really hard to share this thought and to share all this information with the team. Even in all the bugs, even if, in all the training it seems to be easy because well, communicating is easy. It is not. In case the team doesn’t see the problem of this type and you as a Scrum master or a coach you see it, sometimes it’s just good to use this kind of short game. So, it’s all about the motivation because once Cuba was able to see, once he had back his glasses, he was able to accomplish the task very, very quickly in a very efficient way and he seemed to be quite motivated to do it. 

So, this is the thing. If we are being managed and we don’t see the goal and there is this kind of situation, at least I don’t feel good when someone is trying to micro manage me, when someone is just trying to give me very short instructions what I should do without involving me into it, without building, you know, a partnership, and giving, and giving me the opportunity to make some decisions and to really make the project happen, then I feel like in this case. So, what happens, what helps me in the daily basis having a rotated Scrum master, having a sort of rotated manager within the team. So, that, it’s not only me who is managing, but also other people are able to mange me so that I fell how it would be in their shoes and they can feel how it is in my shoes. Then, there is a much better understanding. It’s much more motivating for both the parties. 

In this type of cases I need to cope with a gazillion of emotions. Some of them are positive, some of them are negative and it’s not easy. I’m an extremely emotional person, which is good and bad, right? Because in many cases it’s easier for me to show my enthusiasm, to show my passion or to show that I’m extremely unhappy or unsatisfied with something but in the other cases it’s extremely difficult for me when I need to tame it. So, it’s like in the elephant and rider theory, right? The emotion is the elephant and the more cautious part of myself is the rider. But in many cases no matter how hard they try to tame my elephant and to tell him where to go, how to go, what to do, well, it’s the elephant, right? Extremely powerful, extremely intelligent creature and that it’s the animal, it’s the elephant which is leading. 

Well, when I was starting to hearing my internal voices and trying to understand myself and trying to understand what is motivating me, was that whenever I was sending the rider for the vacation, when there was mainly the elephant that was working for me, that is working for me. When I’m in an environment  where I can let my emotions to lead in many cases because at least till this point I sort of feel that I can rely on my intuition in many cases and in many cases it’s a better decision than going through a very, very long analysis. But this is what’s working for me. I’m not saying that it will work for you. What is important is to find some space, I usually like doing it on the roof of the houses, on the roof of the skyscrapers to meditate, to try to listen to myself and to understand the forces which are inside. 

There are many days, ups, there are many days when I’m being chased by the, many things, right? So, many urgent things, many priorities, many issues, many challenges and what I need to do to feel motivated. In this kind of state I’m totally demotivated, because it’s just too much. I like stress, I like it under the pressure, but it cannot be like a beast which is just chasing me because that will make me extremely demotivated  when I know that the goal that I have is just not possible for me to reach. There was a time when I was thinking about the motivation in the kind that I am motivated when I can be better, but better from other people, right? It was fortunately quite a short period of my life, but there was this time. And at this moment I had two options. One of them is that I’m better than the other person because I’m better. The other is that I’m better from the other person because the other person is worse than I am. And it’s an extremely bad feeling. So, I was able to motivate myself by doing this kind of comparison but for a very, very short period and after that I felt extremely guilty, I felt extremely bad so actually I felt extremely demotivated.  So, from my perspective, competing with other people is great only to a very small extent. If I try to motivate myself by looking at other people and trying to be better, better that they are, it’s demotivating me, it’s extremely demotivating me. But, as I said before, you need to listen to yourself because in case this is something that is motivating you, maybe it’s good to find a good competitor, a person who can be your partner, who can give you a lot of feedback. That you are sort of balanced, that it’s never a huge difference between your achievements. 

I was also trying to change myself. I was trying to motivate myself by using thing things which are not, let’s say, in accordance with my priorities, with my beliefs, with my nature and I failed miserably because when I had to control my behavior all the single second, and I had to control what I was speaking all the single second, it was a nightmare. After every single day I was exhausted, I didn’t know why I am so exhausted. Then after a lot of talks with the good people, with my friends, and after self-analysis I came to the conclusion that I feel extremely exhausted and extremely demotivated if I act against my nature. So, it’s very important to find an environment, to find a team where you can behave as yourself according to your nature. 

Also setting goals which are not in accordance with your capabilities like this great cowboy who would love to shoot a lot of creatures but his kinds are just like that. It’s also demotivating. It’s great to set up a great goal, to go to the moon. For me this kind of goal would be to run the marathon, probably after 200 meters I would just lose, I would lose my lungs and all the other guts inside. I would just throw it away. And that would be the goal, if I set it for myself, I will be also totally demotivated. Half a year ago, it was the middle of the winter, but the winter in Cracow was like a very late autumn, nothing  really winterish, so I decided “I’m going to start running again. Mhm.”  I set myself a goal that I’m going to run 10 kilometers the second day and you can imagine how I failed miserably and till this moment I haven’t restarted running because it was just, just not my style. 

Another thing that, which might be motivating or demotivating is when we do some experiment and the result is totally different than we expected, when we start using some tools and then something totally different happens. It’s extremely demotivating, at least for me when I set myself a very strict goal and I really want to achieve this particular result and any other result would be a failure. So, if I define it in the wrong way. Even if I achieve a success and I just don’t discover, I don’t feel it as a success, it’s going to be, it’s going to be bad. 

Language, the way we communicate. That’s something extremely powerful. We can easily motivate other persons or demotivate by using the wrong words or using the right one by using some kind of a trigger which will cause a lot of emotions in other person’s style. By words we can build those kind of bridges between ourselves. In many cases those kind of bridges which are helpful, which are helping us to get from the bottom, bottom world, that might be extremely motivating.  

Time. Time might also be extremely demotivating. Ok? if we set for the team, for ourselves a goal to be met in a very short time which is not enough it’s going to be a disaster. Of course, we all know that deadlines are motivating because just before the deadline suddenly everyone is so full of energy, is starting a lot of work. We sometimes work over hours, which is completely insane and we look to a lot of things because there is this deadline. But, if we put the deadline absolutely crazy, in an insane way, which is going to be extremely ridiculous, it’s going to be demotivating because from the very beginning we know that we will fail because there is not physical chance to meet the deadline. 

Meetings. Meetings can be demotivating as well. In many cases, I’m not a huge fan of meetings. Whenever I’m on a meeting that’s longer than 30 minutes I get lost, I lose my attention, I feel demotivated and I just want to escape which isn’t always possible unfortunately. When I was talking with my team members they said they also are not huge fans of meetings. That’s why I like the idea of no meeting culture, just sharing the information as it is without the need of meetings because meetings are stressful, might be demotivating especially without agenda, without action items. It’s very tough. 

Sharing ideas. So, motivating each other by inspiring each other. That’s a great way of motivating ourselves and motivating   other people, right? So, if you have some great idea, sometimes it is better to share it, to discuss it, to talk about it because you can inspire a lot of people. I didn’t know that this kind of activity may have this kind of a power. So, whenever I discuss something with someone and he shares some ideas with me, wow, it’s like a magic potion of positive energy, right? Because while motivated we’re like a very, very. Do you remember this  advertisement of Duracell, this rabbit that was running very fast on the right batteries? Motivation can be the same for us. It might be a great energy, energy for us whereas sometimes we feel that work is not the right place. So, we feel that, because of gazillion of devices we are still at work, we don’t have time to recharge our batteries and we are getting less and less motivated whereas work should be something like this, it should be a magical machinery that is converting regular people into superheroes because of the motivation part, because of the inspirational part. And they believe that this is possible because, I don’t know, maybe I was just lucky, but in many cases, the places I had the pleasure to work because of the people I was working with. It was places like this, right? 

Gitte and Lilian are talking about changes. The change is not easy, the change can also be demotivating especially if we don’t know the goal, if we don’t understand it, if we don’t feel secure, if there are so many obstacles. So, we need to be very, very careful in case of a change not to make it demotivating. Sometimes we are in the trap of motivation. So, we want to control the environment, we want to control our motivation beast to make sure that it goes in the right direction. As a regular beast, beasts are not easily tamed. If we try to control it, hm, it may just go back to sleep, that’s one of the situations. It may try to prove us that it is much stronger that we are. So, sometimes it is better, at least in my case it was just better to leave it all alone so that it can go in a natural way.  

So, one of the most surprising findings about motivation I found was that achieving success might be extremely demotivating because what’s the next step? I achieve this goal, I put a lot of effort into it. So we were working on a great project. It was very tough, it was challenging, a lot of obstacles. We did it. Ok? And what’s next? Then, just after achieving the success there is a huge danger that you will fall into a demotivating area that is going to be very dangerous area. In some cases we even do everything not to achieve the goal just to not get to the state which is extremely difficult. 

So, when I was doing my internal analysis about what motivates me, about what is demotivating me, how I can help other people to motivate them, how I can inspire them to be better, to be more happy, to be more smiled people, then I felt that’s, wow, actually Agile, Agile  manifesto. This is a very nice guidance how to do it. So, the rule about the individuals and interactions, from my perspective, that’s the key. So, when the team is focused on individuals, when the team is focused on interactions, when the team is self organized, when it is independent, when there is this management by participation, when they can make the decisions, when they are in charge and they are managing the environment and they can make the project decisions, then it’s getting better. I’m not saying that then the team is 100% motivated, we are like working 200% of the norms, and, you know, we are finishing the projects in half time that we are supposed to do it, but the environment is so much better, it’s so much easier to inspire them. They feel self inspired because they can make choices, they feel in charge of the whole environment. So, actually if you are looking for an interesting inspiration for the motivation maybe it’s worth to read the manifesto once again. Maybe it’s worth to look at it once again and look at the people. I’m talking from a perspective of a very people focused person so it might not apply to you. But, still, I believe that in the manifesto you may find a lot of good motivation recipes. 

So, for the very end, my advice because that was something that I was struggling with, when you’re working on your motivation, when you’re trying to motivate other people, don’t lose things that are important for you. It’s just a cupboard of things which were lost and found and sometimes when I was focusing too much on motivating myself I was losing the things that were the most important for me, in my life. So, I just had to stop. And I had to rethink it and then I’ve got the balance it was much better and I felt much more motivated. So, what I wish you, what I hope it will be take away for you from this half an hour is to listen to yourself. Don’t look at the results of the research, don’t look at the scientific book and try to do everything by the book because you are unique, you are different. There may be so many other things that are motivating you. It’s goo d to look for the inspiration. It’s good to discuss other people and their cases because maybe it’s going to be inspiring for you. But don’t feel bad because something is not working for you. And try to be egoistic, try to look at many things from your perspective because if you’re going to be happy, if you’re going to be motivated, then you can share it with other people.

So, thank you so much, especially huge thank for the volunteers. It was  a pleasure.  
