# Stephen Parry: Keynote - Three principles for designing adaptive, innovative and engaging workplaces

Stephen Parry: Thank you very much, I just want to say thank you very much for the invitation to come to your conference and speak. The audience and what this conference was about, mainly people, was very exciting. What was also exciting was the fact that it was in Kraków which is one of my favorite cities, as well. So, it’s great, it’s great being here. I’ve been here so many times. I have lots of friends. To come here it’s been fabulous. So, I am here. I’m between you and getting home so I am going to try to make it a little bit entertaining if I can. It’s a tough subject. I am trying to put a little bit of science into the whole theory of change.


Now, we’ve had a number of Lean changes for many years, for 20 years now and everybody has been talking about changing the mind set, changing the culture and all these things. But when I tried to look for some academic research on this it was very bitty. So, a number of years ago, in fact in 1999 when I was at Fujitsu, somebody from the London School of Economics phoned me up and said “We are doing this psychological research study on how organizations tick. Can you come along?” and I thought this is a great opportunity. Because we were going through a Lean change then, something that later became call Sense and Respond. What really surprised me about the research is that the academics and the work psychology people have been measuring cultures and work climates for a very long time and for the very first time I’ve got a glance of what a work climate for Lean looks like. And that set me on a ten-year journey with a number of universities to try and understand what it is when we talk about change and particularly Lean change and particularly adaptive change where we are engaging work force. What are the elements that really make a difference? And I am here to show you some of that today only briefly but to show there’s a lot of foundation scientifically for some of the things I’m saying but also some of the things people have been saying up here today and yesterday. So it’s of no surprise that some of these things.. we know but we don’t really have evidence that we can prove it. I want to support that with the evidence now. 


Ok. So, there are three principles to Lean or an Agile organization and there they are: it’s people, people and people. Yes, people, people, people. It’s people that make the difference, it’s people that create value. And Lean and Agile are for the knowledge economy. And when you deploy the principles of Lean with the respect for people, giving people freedom to think and reflect and to experiment, wonderful stuff happens. Now we all know that but now we now have science evidence that tells us why. So, I am going to put some of the science in context with a case study. The case study comes with a slight warning in that actually it is one case study made up of three larger case studies by taking the best of those to show you an illustrative form. Ok? When you look at the case study it’s not one, it’s actually three that have been brought together to illustrate the point. Each one was very, very successful. But for learning purpose I’ve put the three together. If you want to follow me I am Leanvoices on Twitter, I have a blog on leanvoices.com. A lot of what I’ll talk about today will be on leanvoices.com. Ok, so, let’s get into this. 


First of all I want to talk about changing perspectives. I will illustrate that in a moment. The thing I want to focus on is this thing called work climate. I’m not talking culture and I will explain why later. Work climate is  something that we can all feel and we can recognize and I will bring that out. Respect for people and a plain free environment, this is often misunderstood. So I want to give you some of my view on what a blame free environment means, what a respect for people environment means, and it’s not what you think or some of you think anyway. We need to move from what we call mass production thinking to Lean thinking. Mass production is quite clearly coming into very silo, we are hit in the numbers, we are maximizing the output from people and we are focusing on the people and not on maximizing the output from the people as opposed to Lean thinking which is looking at how the whole thing works together to maximize the value to customers and we are free to experiment different ways of doing that. In the mass production environment you are not free to experiment. It’s disciplined compliance in mass production compared to disciplined experimentation in Lean. A completely different way of looking at business and managing people and I will bring that out. We need to… I will demonstrate how we measure the work climate. These are busy slides, there’s a busy slide warning on them quite simple because something as complex as a way an organization thinks it’s very difficult to get down in a couple of slides. I’ve tried my best. Then into the case study itself. There’s lots of references and resources and recommended reading at the back. I will say when I am talking about references and sources I have been absolutely, incredibly lucky throughout my career to met people that have helped me in my journey, mentored me, and that’s been terrific. So, if you want to find out where that background is, please take a look on leanvoices. I have it fully documented there. 


So, I just want you to watch this video carefully. This video comes from the 1970’s and this is really about, this was put out by the Guardian newspaper. It’s available on YouTube so you can use it in your transformation workshops. It illustrates the point that I am talking about. I will talk over this as we go through. So ,this guy has seen a car, he doesn’t like the look on them so he is running away. Is it a gang land thing, who knows? From another perspective he is running down the street, he is going to hit that guy, steal his bag. But, let’s take another look, the bigger picture. We see something completely different. That is the essence of changing the way organizations perceive the outside world and how they perceive what goes on in the inside world. In mass production, we each have our own single points of view and we do our busy , busy bang, bang stuff and we try to make more bang for the back in the hope that it will turn out OK. But we are all doing that independently. What Lean does, it allow everybody to get that bigger picture. In fact, without the bigger picture we cannot work. And some of the survey stuff that I will be showing you will be telling us how organizations see that bigger picture or don’t. It’s really important that we move to seeing the bigger picture. What we are trying to do is we are trying to liberate the willing controversy of our staff because it is only the willing controversy that creates breakthrough, cold knowledge, and insight. You can’t command and control somebody to be brilliant. Ok? Somebody was saying this week “I make great code in the shower”. I come up with my best ideas when I am relaxed, sometimes in the shower. You can’t command and control those sorts of breakthroughs in thought. They come when they come. Musicians have a word for that, it’s called the muse or in the groove. It’s exactly that. So, in order to have that freedom your performance is a matter of choice, being able to do different things at the right time which is a matter of freedom with a power to do in this case what matters to our customers. 


But there are things that get in the way. There’s the red tape from the job role, the processes, the procedures or the methods that we are told to follow. The performance measures, the style of leadership, all of these things get in the way. In a mass production environment if we step out of the line there is a lot of blame. So, we are going through a transformation, we have to get these links, we have to break them down, and we have to do that in a systemic way or systematically. We cannot just go out to changing things because we don’t know the cause and the fact and a lot of things. I would say that the biggest thing that would change your organization very, very quickly without thinking about all of these change processes is go and change your measurement system to end-to-end. And is about outcomes for your customer. Don’t measure the quantities of things. It is how things perform together, end-to-end and you call everybody to that goal. You will have a massive change in perspective. And that’s one of the places that I started. In fact, I don’t start a transformation until we’ve measured that. What is the performance end-to-end for what matters to our customers. This is the first principle of Lean. But very few people actually do that, they do the other principles, the value stream map, their process map. They look at all the steps that don’t create value, chop those out and make things go faster not realizing that what they were making before didn’t satisfy the customer . Now they are making it faster and what they’ve done is use Lean or Agile and created cheaper, neater, faster waste. And it’s cheaper and you get this delusion, a self-deception, a seduction that works. We’re still, we remain automated, we automate work that need not be done.  We’re still, we send it offshore to low cost labor economies so that they can process it cheaper, neater, faster waste. And the amount of waste that is in an organization is absolutely tremendous. But I am not going to focus on waste today. I am going to focus on the waste and human potential, not the waste in resources. 


So, how do we break this down? Well, it’s people, people, people. What I mean here is your clients or your direct customer or your clients’ customer. That’s one group of people. Engaging them and deeply understanding them on what they are trying to achieve, what is their purpose in business, ok? Deep understanding, this is not the same as the voice of the customer which you get as a sigma. In Lean the voice of the customer means he is in there with you day in day out on your shop floor working through the transformation. We don’t need to write it down. He is there with us, we go into his environment. The one thing about having the customer in your environment as you’re going through the transformation is this: it stops all the politics. It really does. Just try it. But you have to be brave enough to go open book and say “Look, we don’t do everything perfect. There’s lots of things that we need to do and get the right customer involved in doing that.” So, we need to engage, deeply understand. And that’s how front line operations, I mean in sales people, account teams, engineers, anybody that touches and understands the customer. We need to grab that information. And we share it, we learn from this. We share it end-to-end.  We take this end-to-end perspective and the leadership then have to listen and adapt, not command and control. What is this data telling us, what should we be doing, what are the opportunities that are there? And then we should be directing our people to actually go after new sorts of value, to experiment new products and services at the same time we are delivering the other stuff.  Most organizations can’t do that because there is too much waste in the system. People say to me ”We can’t do this, Stephen, because we don’t have the resources” and I point out “You do have the resources. You are just doing the wrong work.“ So spotting what the wrong work is really part of the improvement cycle. So improving, then we adapt, innovate and improve. This is using every point of contact with our business to systematically capture what’s going on in the customer’s world, making sense, measuring how we deliver to what matters to the customer and using that information to really drive innovation. Innovation comes from having low levels of waste. Innovation comes from having a work force that is capable of solving the problems at scale. 


We heard earlier on in the week about A3. I love A3 but it isn’t practiced as A3. It’s a tool and we’ll talk about tools in a minute. So, whatever your changed program is, somebody comes along and says” We’re going to do Lean , Agile”, and I am not going to say the other word. All of those things and somebody says ”Ok, we’ll base line our current performance. We think we are going to get to this transformation and objective up here. This is what we’ve heard, this is what we can do.”  So, then we put in the new tools and methods for improvement, we put them through a ship deep. You know what a ship deep is?  Put a ship in and there’s a crowd and out they come and they are supposed to be experts the other side. And then we take a look at, well, the new performance and everybody zip it, mystified. Well, he haven’t had a steep change, it’s just a little bit. So what has gone wrong? We followed all the books, we’ve read all the book. We are diligently using the tools and the methods. So, what is going wrong? And what I suggest is the gap. The performance gap is the way that we manage our people. Let me explain. Their perspective is wrong. It’s within the silo, very often they used the tools and techniques to improve the silo and everybody knows you sub optimize the whole. But everybody is sub optimizing the whole. You’ve got subpotmiziation times ten, times twenty, however many functions you’ve got. It further fragments the business, not joins it up. It certainly doesn’t lead to flow and it creates more waste. 


So, the perspective  from working in the silo to horizontal as Womack, Jim Womack of the Lean Enterprise Institute famously said ”We need  to move from vertical management to horizontal management”. And that changes everything, changes our measurement system, our perception on the customer, our knowledge of the business and how we collaborate. Everything changes. So, if everything changes, we may have to change the work design. We definitely have to change the measurement system and the behaviors that will come with it.  Now, I am a great believer in that you get the behavior you’re designing for or in some cases you fail to design for. Behavior is not a choice for most people. People are forced to behave in a particular way because of the climate, the measurement systems and the drive to certain targets. So, behavior is an outcome of your design and if it is not a good design, you have bad behavior. 


Ok. All that above the yellow line I call the Lean work climate. If you don’t get that right you will not bridge that gap and all those are related to how people work together, how managers manage, what they pay attention to. I will start illustrating that in a moment. But to do that we need to focus on four things: engaging and understanding, learning and sharing, leading and decision making, improving and changing. That’s the learning cycle. Let’s talk quickly before we get into the main body of this presentation, about this respect for people from first to last. Lean is not about cutting people, it’s about growing people. And if you’ve grown those people that they can take out lots of waste it seems like a very wasteful thing to get rid of these smart people. You’re investing in your people. Lean is an investment in your work force. I won’t read through all of these. I think my favorite here is about as a manager or a coach which a lot of the Lean or Agile experts call themselves. Coach is helping them to see. There’s a saying here “There is a world of difference between helping people to see and telling them they are blind.” Very different. It takes time and conversation to grow. Lean grows people. A3 grows people. It’s a talent management system at its best. It has nothing to do with processes. If you’ve got talented people with the right measurement systems, with the right incentives, everything improves, including your processes. 


Ok. We try to create a blame free culture but I do like this quote and we’ve seen a lot of Lego slides this week. So, Lego is obviously in fashion. This is a quote from the CEO. We do blame for two things as it said: “Blame is not for failure, but it is for failing to help out when asked”. Now I am sticking in my silos, I’ve got my target. Helping out is normal. The other thing is failing to ask for help when you know you are in trouble because you want to do it independently. Work in an organization is a team game and I know in that from the conversation in the opening speech I’ll refer back to that. I am an introvert, too. There are lots of us. I like the science to do my talking for me. I like engaging in one to one rather than big events like this. But everybody needs collaboration.  No man is an island. But even the introverts need to ask for help when they need it. 


So, what does this engaging look like? I am going to take you gently through this now so we can characterize what engaging in a mass production organization looks like towards an Agile or a Lean organization. Basically engaging here says “Does the job design allow you to even talk to your customer? Or you’re designed out?” The system designed you out of talking to your customer. Gone is the first principle of Lean. Very often is the product manager that does that and we hope it gets it right. But in Lean organizations we actually got more people so we have different perspective on that, a deeper understanding, so it’s not lost in translation. And there’s more involvement. To what extent can stuff modify the solutions in response to customer needs? Now, in development I think you can do a lot more of that but in other organizations and other industries you can’t. The products and services are fixed. This next one gives you an idea. Is everything in your department forbidden, it’s locked down? You can’t do anything unless you ask permission. All right? Or is everything permitted, you can do all of these things . I trust you, you are trained at the right level but don’t touch the soft compliance stuff over here because we’ll be in legal trouble. But for the rest of the stuff, you see, it’s a completely different mentality of management. You’d feel differently in that organization.


So, what does learning mean? Now, I’ve got this information about the customers. Do employees routinely share it within their team at the functions and even with the executive teams? How often do you see the executive teams? I spoke to one organization only last week and I found out that some people in that organization hadn’t seen the chief executive in their building for three years because he was going to places. He was a great advocate of Lean yet he didn’t go and see the people where Lean happens.  So, we changed that. But that came as a complaint from the staff. What is the management focus? Employ utilization, busy, busy, bang, bang, trying to get more time and utilization out, work intensification and work task intensification. Or is it creativity, building creativity in your staff? Focusing your staff on your customer outcomes. Does it do what is says on the ten: problem sharing, learning, sharing knowledge and collaboration, actively encouraging collaboration? Very often in the command and control environment people say “You are working for me, don’t go and talk to the other guys.” All right? We’ve got to meet our goals, don’t waste your time elsewhere.  But there is no time wasted in collaboration. 


So, leading. What type of leading are we talking about? I believe leadership and I think we’ve heard it from a number of people, leadership is an activity, not a position. And Lean and Agile require people to lead at every level. But to lead at every level people need to know it’s fairly risk free. This is the important thing. We reserve the right to be wrong when there’s evidence. And that is a strength not a weakness. But unless you’ve got the prediction right, and you want to alter it you can’t because you are not seen as you’re not in control in a mass production environment. And that’s last thing you want to do in a mass production environment is show that you don’t have control when in fact the mass production has less control than a Lean environment as we will demonstrate. 


So, improving. Can your staff improve the end –to- end process? Can you improve the products and services or you just sit there do your busy, busy, bang, bang and hope everybody else is doing the same busy, busy, bang, bang and it all joins up somewhere. But nobody is doing the integration. And then we put supervisors in to get a bigger bang for the back so we get busy, busy, bang, bang, bang, bang. And then we turn around and say we have no time for improvement. No, because we’ve gone for the utilization. We’ve taken people out as soon as we can because the utilization of staff maximizing the output of the staff instead of maximizing value to the customer is its philosophy. I’d rather have people sitting around doing other things as long as we are maximizing value for the customer. Because that’s what pays the bills at the end of the day. 


So, I am going to talk about a climate. I was comparing engaging, learning, leading, improving. I was comparing what a mass production in a Lean environment looks like. We know that, we can feel that. So, I am asking you to think about this thing called the work climate. It’s not a culture. A work climate sits at the surface layer of an organization and these are sorts of things. Great work only happens when the management is trustworthy. And having a trust strategy is critical to your success. If the management are lying, changing the mangle all the time, not standing up for things, particularly driving knowledge work to excellence, if they are not standing up for that you will come back. Your commitment will no longer be willing. You’ll hold back especially if there’s going to be errors. You’re going to hold back. You don’t want the attention. So the climate now is gone cold and sometimes actually is not a cool environment is a red-hot environment because if I get out of sync with my management it becomes red –hot. You want to avoid that. So, this can be red-hot environment. So that reduces your performance. Or it could be a pretty cool environment. It’s pretty relaxed. We’re taking time for reflection, we are actually producing better quality work, we are getting deeper insights. All of these in knowledge work is about insight, creating better things. And the environment is that thing that forces us to behave in a particular way. If you’ve got that toxic environment, you won’t behave in the right way. But in the cool environment, where it’s safe, you will succeed. 


So, this is a busy slide. These are the dimensions that we measure for engaging, learning, leading and improving. It is a scientific study, it’s done online. The whole company gets involved. So we are measuring how the organization feels to the people, the managers, and the leaders. Is this a good climate? Now, a climate… The good thing about climate is it is easy to change. The bad thing about a climate is that it’s easy to change. So, let me give you an example. You had a previous boss, Joe was really great. He gave all the time, the output was good. It was great coming to work. There was no challenge in getting out of bed. You worked overtime. You were putting more in. Then, there is a new boss. He says “I just want two more lines of code.”, all these volumetric numbers driving the efficiency. Cost at all cost. Suddenly the environment doesn’t feel the same. The work climate has changed as quickly as that. That’s how quick a change is. A new boss comes in and it can change it. But I am going to make a distinction here between work climate and the culture. Has the culture of the organization changed? No. It has just been pushed back a little bit while this new boss is there. The culture that you’ve learned is still there. If that bad manager stays in place for any length of time, that work climate will slowly become the culture. Ok? So every culture starts off as a work climate until it becomes codified, all symbols, all recognition. So, what our challenge is here is whatever the culture, work climate can change quite quickly with the right management approach. But we’re going to have a lot of trust to do that if there’s been a bad climate previously. But establishing the trust is one thing and get the new work in practices on the basis of this trust the climate is changed. This is good. But the old bad culture is still there and can swamp back. So the job of you guys and your managers is to hold on to the new work climate. Once you’ve got it, don’t let it go. You hang on to it with your life. And that takes courage. It takes courage, truth, honesty and tenacity. And some of the work that I do with leaders in organization and I mean people of lower level of the organization, the leaders in the everyday work. We teach them how to have that courage, to look at the stories the company says about itself, to highlight the in authenticities. And as a group you can do that. You become the conscience of the organization until it becomes the consciousness of the business. This all sounds like touchy, feely, soft stuff. But this is your work place. Which one would you rather work in? I know which one I would rather work in. And it is your choice if you are sitting there waiting for the big boss to come along and say “We want to change the work climate.” It is not going to happen. You can make a choice to start, get the right manager in the right place and start. You can have your one microclimate in one area, just need to start. I’m going to show you, some case studies in a moment where people did just that. But let me take the technical staff out of the way. If you are interested in the technical stuff and how to measure climate this is it. If you are just accepting the concept of climate you can switch to screen saver for the next two minutes. 


OK. So these are the questions. I am going to look at engaging and learning first then leading and improving. So let me just say in the center here this is neutral neither one nor the other. But going better mass production, or better Lean is a completely different route map as I will demonstrate. This is one company, these are two development teams in two different countries doing exactly the same work. They are doing Agile, they are doing Scrum, they are doing Kanban, they are doing all of it. And they have somebody checking on a check sheet. Are doing it? So comparatively they are using the same method, but one team is massively outperforming the other, it is much more innovative, less waste as a great place to work. In fact everybody wants to go there and the other one they want to get away from. So let’s have a look what the climate survey said. In the one location it was mass production. Let me just explain this. This is a weak thing, it is neither mass production, is a bit leaders have no control. It’s a standardized, a standard mass production environment which you could have an excellent one as well. Ok? So a good standard one with a good base, mass production will be red all the way down here. Ok? But we are not. It’s fragmented. It’s not even a good mass production. It’s not even a good mass production. So, let me explain. They have autonomy within their work, it’s not too bad, they do some customer facing activity, of course. Intelligence gathering, very little intelligence gathering about the customer’s world. Ok? Do they share intelligence within the team? Yes, they do. And they do it really well. They do it really well within the silo. Ok. 


Organization and understanding, next to nothing. So, how could they share if they don’t know where the other teams are? They don’t interact anyway so their knowledge about the organization is very lacking. Remember seeing the big picture of your organization? It is vitally important to know how it all works. Sharing intelligence within the function, excellent and with local functions. great.  Sharing intelligence with senior management we never see them. Now these are not my words, these are the words of live people just like you, just like you. 


So let’s look at the other team on engaging and learning. Remember they are doing the exact same work once they are performing. Levels autonomy still not great, costumer facing activity was good but in a Lean way they were looking for new services or products. They were looking for what can I sell you next off my shelf. That was a push. Here is a pole, intelligence gathering from the costumer environment. What’s going on? Very little here. Sharing that information with the team. Their organization understanding, huge, which means if I’ve got a problem I know where to go. I don’t need permission, I can just go and talk, pick up the phone, have a quick meeting with them, whatever it is. Sharing within the function, sharing with other functions and sharing with senior managers. It was routine, that the manager went to the work place and said “Hey guys, what’s going on, what do you need my help with?” So they were removing obstacle here. This wasn’t even a good command and control organization. This is what I call a command and hope organization. 


Leading and Improving. Again performance management was weak. They weren’t even doing good mass production so there were lots of loose things. The leadership approach was almost nonexistent.  Responsiveness to customer issues was extremely high. Absolutely! All right. But implementing ideas to better serve costumers was low, this is strange. Not until you realize that what they were responding to is the customer complaint and once that’s out of the way is back to the busy, busy, bang, bang stuff. 


Improving. They weren’t improving the service, the workplace and the functions or end-to-end. Look at this, end-to-end process employ functions. That’s two teams working for the same organization, both using Agile, Scrum and Kanban and they ticked all the boxes. So just bear that in mind. I now want to move to the other side of the fence. We talked about the devon problems which I think is a totally made up thing, by the way, made up by the people who are trying to sell automation technology. So why better make up a problem and them give them a tool to do it with. Yes there is a problem between development and ops, but as we will see there is a lot of problems within every part of development and every part within the ops they are just as fragmented. So why pick on this little lonely one? OK. Is the same thinking end-to-end, and the reason is I honestly believe it’s people selling technologies because developers are frustrated with what’s happening in the operate space. So let’s give them a tool so they don’t have to talk to people. OK. So let’s go through that.


 You know the problems in development, I’m not going to stand here and tell you what you already know. I’m going to take you on the other side of the fence. We are going to their game bum and their problem here was quite simply. It’s a global company, they needed to build servers and this was initiated by one guy in Philadelphia saying “I want to do an A3 on this because it’s not working.” And out of that came this exercise. And they did change the way that servers were procured, built, managed and everything else. But to do that they had to show the management what was going on, but they didn’t know what was going on. They just knew it was frustrating and it was broken. How do we make sense of this? It’s highly complex. So I am transporting you now over the other side of the wall. This stuff will be in the slide set. Needless to say it’s a cross functional team from right across the business. We are getting them in the room to try and figure out what the value stream was. To do that we gave them a system. And I’ve used the system for a great number of years, at least ten years. It’s a variation of value stream mapping. But I think this gives us a lot more information because in IT related stuff we have the technology stuff that we are dealing with, we have the technology we are managing and we have the technology we are managing the technology with. So it’s all technology. 


Ok. The live cycle process, phases, high level process, the area responsible for that processes, KPI’s by phase, what data is required to take this activities, what tools or policy is required and other interdependencies. Just remind it, just think about that, don’t study it too hard. That’s just the key to what you are going to see. So, this is a team, these are technicians, mentors, architects, enterprise management people, all of them. Ok? Even some guys from procurement, from the parts, from networks, build the operating systems, load the applications, clear the space they need, all of that. So they are trying to figure out how all of this fits together because they are all in different departments and the work is going everywhere. So you see they are starting to figure this out. And this work, from this point on is three days work, three days work. All right? These 12 people or more were in this room for 12 days. As I said to me ”We are not coming out here until we figure this out.” And after 2 days they said “We are not staying here anymore.” Just kidding. The interesting thing was when we started talking about the whole value stream and stuff and started building this and a number of people said ”Listen, my boss told to come in here and just talk about my bit and get the hell out.”  We said “I’m sorry, you have to learn the whole thing. We need to find where you fit in this. You need to know where you fit in this because we currently don’t know.” And after the first day he was then engaged and the manager said “You just tell them what they want and come back. I’ve got work for you.” But he rang up his manager “This is far too important.” So these are the guys trying to figure this out. The usual pain-point mapping. I am not in favor of pain-point mapping for a various reasons to complicate the. But they like the pain-point mapping so I said ”Ok, go ahead.”  They learned afterwards the pain-points were symptoms, all symptoms, not causes. So we can now see the map coming up, the major phases. This is a simple, low tech, ok? This was all done with Microsoft bond paper. It’s a program, it’s a map you can load. So these were the different phases. You can put these the general activities, these with the different departments, and you can see different departments were using, doing the same activities so it’s going in different ways. Sometimes it goes that way, sometime it goes that way, depending on who picked it up. All right? Then they needed to start these shapes here right across here were the measures that they started developing because they didn’t have measures by phases.  Because what we are measuring was just quantity. Was in, get it out, in get it out. But they were all doing that independently so there was no sequencing of the right server bills. Ok? And then this is the information that is required to do the work and these are the tools. These are lots of tools that people use to do the work. And I’ll deep dive into that. 


The thing that I want to point out, which was the revelation that that is where they took the order to build something. The order was coming from development guys saying “ I need a system to do a concept, a cool bunch of things.” They were testing things to destruction as well. Also we get orders because we need to increase capability. So, there’s all sorts of servers for all sorts of reasons going through this. And you had all the procurement, configuration, and all of those sorts of things. But that’s where the build starts, much to the surprise of everybody. What they looked at was most of the problems they were working on down here and overcome. And I’ll show how they overcome lots of these problems was because they didn’t have basic information here because this was completely empty. There was a preproduction phase that nobody had thought about. It was given to the techies to figure it out. Ok? There wasn’t even a technology route map. Which ones are we going to select? They are free to select them. They were free to select different monitoring tools. These are all the monitoring tools. And even more, they run out, the guy was going crazy “Give me more stickies, give me more stickies.” All right? It is funny, yes. But when you realize these guys were working shifts, handing over stuff. We didn’t have an architecture that made sense. We didn’t know where it all was. And we were all using different methods to control it. So different departments were crossing over with other people. The alerts from the enterprise management tools, that so many alerts which were all alerts, we’ve forgotten what they were for. But we didn’t have time to go and turn them off, so they came in and we would check them. It’s a false alarm, but we would check it just in case. And they learned to do it just in case because that one said ”Ah, it’s a false alarm.” We’ll guarantee that’s the one which will bring the system down. And they say “There was an alert, why didn’t you pick that?” You know, one in ten million. I am exaggerating, it was 20. It’s really difficult. All right. So we needed to rationalize. Guys how can you do that? How is it helping security? Who will host the stuff? The security policy were very difficult as you can imagine. This is the world of the developers. I even doubt the decommissioning and disposal. Just for interest, they were coming up with measures. Some of these were quantities, as well. So make sure the production was going through the system. 


These were what I call the golden five. Whatever measure you have, if you have these four, five things you are probably on the right track. One it has to be a measure of how it is creating value for the customer. It also has to reduce the cost of the process and the end-to-end time. Velocity is the most important thing. You need to reduce the variation in delivery. You need to reduce the working progress. It’s the working progress and getting rid of it that gives you adaptability.  But the one that was the most important is whatever change you make it has to make the employees happier. If it doesn’t make the employees happier, then the change you put in place is still not good enough. You have to make the employees’ life better, not just here hit the target. This is what these guys were doing. Then they deep dived into different bills. Ok? So not only was it fragmented, not only people were using different tools, the work that was going through was being reworked and reworked and reworked and sent back. All right? But these guys had orders to get out and people were chasing them. But as we can see when we formalize that picture now, remember that, we are now formalizing it. There was a preproduction process and then the production phases. This is where the most of the guys were doing all the busy, busy, bang, bang. This is heroic work. So, let’s just drill down the preproduction. These in yellow mean that we’ve got something but it wasn’t fit for purpose. Red means that activity is completely missing. But when we look in the build in the actual production part, it is pretty good, but it could be a lot better. It wasn’t fit for purpose but we can raise that up. 


The next slide is very busy but you can’t read the details but you can see the colors. That’s what I want to draw your attention. So put in the production and the preproduction together what do we see? This represents all those tools, all those different ways of working. And yes, even they have gaps. So this is a very detailed level. These were all the departments that were doing the same thing but in multiple different ways. This is where they started to build. These red areas were completely absent because they had to work the value stream. People were giving these guys work but without the information about the standards that we were going to use, the selection of certain types of products. All of these..ok? They were improvising like hell. And they did a good job, but they had to be heroes. Heroic leadership in a Lean organization is a failure not a triumph. 


We needed to go further. They needed to be able to give this information to the executive team. You imagine, you are going to tell the big boss ”These  guys, three days they got that information. “ and there were lots of arguments, I can tell you. But they came up with this and said “This is what we wanted it to look like. We have to redesign for this, this is the measurement system.” But they needed to present this data to the management team. They knew it was going got be difficult. So it’s a bit like going to a mother and telling her “Your baby is ugly.” That’s what we trained them for, to give this information. This is the guy. But not only the map that you just saw. We were also looking at other behaviors. These are.. This is a measure here. All this stuff like our staff got trained, we’ve got good process improvement, a whole range of things and we said “How well do we say we do it?, How well do we say it to ourselves, the management say to us? Are we doing from 1 to 10? 10 being good. So, here it is, the blue line. As we say it good be better. This is really good. And then we say ”What is it really like, really, really like?” By this time there is a safe environment to talk out. 


And then we have the reality. There is reality. And between the two we have the gap. We have the gap between the perception and the reality. And then we ask a very important question. Ok. So what happens, what cost do we pay to the customer, to the business, to ourselves? What cost gets paid by us to pretend one way that reality is another way? And is out of integrity, lack of willingness, all the stuff, all the climate stuff because what we were saying was not like what we were doing. And everybody knew. Everybody knew but we weren’t going to talk about it because it’s not safe. So we pretend, we continue to pay the cost. So I asked a very important question. There is the pretence. It’s getting to really important point. There’s the pretence, there’s the reality, there’s the list of cost to you personally and to a black cat. Black cat? The black cat came into this because when we were doing the cost one guy says” The black cat gets it.” What do you mean? Every night I go home and I kick the black cat. So for the sake of the black cat we have to change something because we are sick of being kicked. So, all of that cost, loss of integrity, loss of motivation, boring job, loss of contribution, only do stuff when asked, the sense of futility. And then I said, “One question. If you’re paying all that cost, there must be a benefit. What is the benefit?” And they thought about it for a while and they said “The benefit is this. If we take our responsibility and we get it wrong, we do not get blamed.” And that’s what we mean but creating a blame free environment. We have to do that. So this is serious science about how work gets processed and how we design work and who should be doing that. They change this dramatically. This is before. Those guys at that operation just engaging. It wasn’t even great mass production. They could have said” we ’’l go for an improvement objective.” And they said “No, no, no.” This has got to really change. We are going to have a transformation objective.” And 18 months later, that’s what you saw. Don’t need the detail. Leading before mass production, decided the complete opposite to go. That’s the summary.


So, in organizations we have to learn. If we want to improve this, that’s improvement and it’s nothing wrong with that but if you want adaptability, wiling contribution and innovation we have to redesign our thinking and we need to go this way. And Lean and Agile, even Scrum and Kanban, I correct myself, Kanban as practiced by some people I recently associated with has those elements, treating people best. Willing contribution comes from open, honest conversations. It’s time to end the pretence. We’ve got work to do. Thank you. 


